From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
[music]
>> For the past decade, the Supreme Court
has relied on a rushed and secretive
system to make major [music] rulings on
everything from immigration to
presidential power.
Now, for the first time, a Times
investigation [music]
brings to light the precise moment when
that system began.
Today,
Jodi Kantor [music] and Adam Liptak take
us inside the five days that remade the
Supreme Court.
>> [music]
[music]
>> It's Monday, April [music] 20th.
Jodi, Adam, together at last in one
episode of The Daily. Thank you for
being here. Great to be with you.
>> It's good to be here, Michael. So, you
two joined forces for an investigation
that seems to begin with a genuine
curiosity. Which is what are the origins
of the Supreme Court's shadow docket?
So, tell us why you were both drawn to
answering that question.
It's a pretty common-sense question,
Michael, because if we look at the
court's rulings, they are doing an
enormous amount of work on the shadow
docket. These are really important
rulings that
bypass a lot of the time-tested steps of
the court. So, part of what we're asking
here is
let's go back to the beginning. How did
the court
start doing this? Where does this come
from?
Adam, I know we've talked on the show
about the shadow docket quite a bit, but
just remind us what it is, and more
importantly,
how, as Jodi just said, it bypasses the
time-tested steps of the Supreme Court.
So, a good way to think about this is
to contrast it with the usual way the
court handles cases.
Uh lawyers call this the court's merits
docket, and this is what we're kind of
used to.
The justices spend a lot of time
considering which cases to go into here.
And they get briefs on that. And if they
decide to hear a case, they get another
round of briefs
and supporting briefs, and then they
hear arguments.
And then they sit together and discuss
and vote.
And then they exchange drafts, five, 10,
15 drafts of opinions and concurrences
and dissents. And after all this process
winds itself out for like a year,
they issue a reasoned decision, could be
100 pages long,
with lots of concurrences and dissents,
and it's the product of great care and
deliberation.
And these decisions, of course,
are law that binds the nation, that
gives guidance to lower courts,
>> Mhm. tells litigants how they have to
act. That's the Supreme Court we're used
to.
The shadow docket short-circuits all of
that.
It happens in a very brief period of
time on thin briefs,
no arguments, no in-person
deliberations. It gives rise to rulings
with scant or no reasoning at all. And
over the past 10 years, this has really
become a major part of the court's
business, including in some decisions
over the past year or so that have
awarded President Trump enormous leeway
and power.
>> [music]
>> Increasingly, the court has turned to
this shadow docket.
>> This is an exponential increase in the
Supreme Court's use of the shadow
docket, more than anything we've ever
seen before.
>> They've used it 20 times so far this
year, and the year is not even over yet
>> It's insane at the shadow docket.
>> And what critics have worried about is
they've said
>> The race to [music] create fait accompli
is changing the speed and rhythm of all
of these cases. [music] Why is the
Supreme Court not moving at its usual,
careful, deliberate pace?
>> There's no problem in the abstract with
the idea that the Supreme Court got some
emergencies. The problem we've seen in
the last five or six years is the way
the justices are intervening. And also,
>> you get this kind of
back-of-the-envelope reasoning from the
justices, two, three sentences.
>> Those decisions are not reasoned
decisions. They don't tell us why. I
mean, five paragraphs doesn't tell us
why. [music]
Why is the Supreme Court not providing
any reasoning for such major decisions?
>> But the emergency docket, or shadow
docket, [music]
is a dangerous thing. You run to the
court, you don't have full briefing, you
don't have full argument.
>> So, critics have been concerned both
about the quality of the rulings. Is it
possible to issue
a really solid ruling in such a
shortened process?
And also, the lack of communication with
the public. [music]
Right, because these rapidly reached,
barely explained rulings that emerge
from the shadow docket
raise a really important question. Is
the country's highest court rushing to
rule based on because we don't really
know gut instinct, personal pique,
partisan instinct, all the things that a
slow, deliberate, judicious system is
meant to avoid. We don't know.
Well, defenders of the shadow docket,
the emergency docket, will say a couple
of things.
One is that these kinds of orders have a
long history, and that's true.
The court has often interceded when it
needs to move very fast, like in a death
penalty case when someone's about to be
put to death,
or an election dispute where you need to
know by Tuesday what the answer is.
And also, occasionally, in discrete
areas like abortion,
the court has issued emergency orders,
but it's not used the emergency docket
to address major national policy
initiatives.
The second thing I'd say, or the
defenders of these orders would say,
is that they're temporary. They're not
meant to conclusively resolve the case.
They're just holding the status quo
while the case moves through the lower
courts, comes back to the Supreme Court.
So, they're nominally temporary, but as
a practical matter, very often, they're
not only consequential, but conclusive,
>> Mhm. finally resolving the matter,
because if the court says you can deport
someone, or you can deport hundreds of
thousands of people, or you can withhold
aid money, or you can fire thousands of
people, You're talking about shadow
docket cases of the Trump era. Yeah,
these are not hypotheticals. These are
actual cases. Those are very hard to
undo. You can say it's temporary,
but if the imagine it goes back to the
court, and imagine the court says, "You
know what?
Actually, the Trump administration was
wrong." It's very hard to undo those
rulings. So, even if they are temporary
in nature, they are extremely
meaningful in practice. Yes. And so, the
question is what is actually happening
inside the Supreme Court with these
cases.
>> And Adam and I wanted to see
if we could find out. And we did.
And what does that very tantalizing
sentence actually mean, "You did"?
Well, The New York Times has obtained
and has published 16 pages of
confidential correspondence
among the justices,
meaning their private back-and-forth
that reveal the origins of the shadow
docket.
>> Mhm. Through these papers, we can
eavesdrop on the justices at the exact
moment that they are abandoning
time-tested norms of judicial procedure
and backing themselves into a new way of
doing business. That new way being the
shadow docket.
>> Exactly. So, Adam, give us the context
for these documents that Jodi just
mentioned.
So, these documents concern a case
in 2016
arising from President Obama's Clean
Power Plan. The Clean Power Plan, you
may recall,
was Obama's attempt, late in his second
term, to do something about climate
change.
>> Mhm. He'd failed to get legislation
through Congress. He instructed the EPA
to issue regulations, and these
regulations would fundamentally
shift the American power system away
from coal
and toward cleaner sources of energy.
This, of course, drove industry crazy
and red states crazy, and they
challenged it, and that's not
surprising. And they go to the DC
Circuit, and they ask for two things.
One, their big ask is to please hold
this Clean Power Plan unlawful,
unauthorized by Congress. But second,
they ask, "In the meantime, please halt
it. Don't let it go into place. You
freeze it for the time being while the
litigation goes forward."
And the DC Circuit says,
"On the first point, we'll set it down
for a quick argument, and we'll get
ourselves in position to give you an
answer on whether the program is illegal
or not. On the second thing, though,
we're not going to pause it. We're going
to let the program start."
And then, the challengers, the states
and business groups, do something
unusual.
They go to the Supreme Court and say,
"Before any lower court has considered
the lawfulness of the Clean Power Plan,"
they say to the Supreme Court, "Please
halt this. Please freeze this for as
long as it takes for this litigation to
go through the DC Circuit, back up to
the Supreme Court. In the meantime, the
Clean Power Plan should not be
happening."
And everybody involved in the case
knew that this was an unprecedented
request.
And Jody, this unprecedented request by
those who do not want the Clean Power
Plan from the Obama administration to
survive, arrives at a Supreme Court, if
memory serves,
that's pretty evenly split at the
moment. Correct. It's a 5-4 court that
leans towards the Republican appointed
justices.
But people from that era say, "The
Supreme Court was really different back
then. It was alive with debate." Justice
Anthony Kennedy was a Republican
appointee, but he was also the swing
vote. And somebody from that era called
him a quote "persuadable person." You
never knew exactly which way he would
come out. And just before this, he had
said yes to gay marriage. Right. Even
though he was a Republican appointee, he
ends up being the somewhat surprising
decisive vote in that case. All to say,
this is a
unpredictable Supreme Court where a lot
of things are possible. Exactly.
So how does this very evenly split court
react, Adam, to this emergency request?
Well, it arrives in the chambers of
Chief Justice John Roberts. He's the
justice who oversees the DC Circuit, so
these things go to him in the first
instance.
And in the ordinary course, what the
lawyers involved in the case expected
would happen,
was that he would simply deny it, deny
the application, or maybe send it to his
colleagues and they would collectively
deny it.
>> Mhm.
But what he does instead is he starts
writing a memo telling the other
justices that they should [music] take
this very seriously. Mhm.
And that sets off a 5-day sprint [music]
in which the justices
are going to revise centuries of Supreme
Court practice.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
So Adam and Jody, we're now in the phase
of this story where the justices are
exchanging these memos that you have
unearthed over these 5 days. And Adam,
let's start with this opening salvo from
the Chief Justice, John Roberts. Tell us
about his first memo.
So this is a three-page single-spaced
memo on letterhead that says "The
Chambers of the Chief Justice."
And he explains to his colleagues why he
thinks
the Obama plan needs to be halted. He
says it's going to impose enormous
burdens on states
and on the coal industry.
He says there's no time to waste because
they're going to have to start complying
with the requirements of the Clean Power
Plan right away.
He says
that the law the president relies on to
authorize this move, the Clean Air Act
of 1970,
does not clearly give him that power,
and the court likes
to say that unless
a president clearly has the power,
it runs afoul of the major questions
doctrine and is no good.
>> Mhm.
And he says
the EPA has kind of tricked us not long
ago, and we're not going to let him do
that to us again.
>> Mhm. Tricked how? What does he say? Just
a few months before all of this, the
court had ruled against the EPA in a
case involving mercury emissions.
That case had been litigated over 3
years, 3 and 1/2 years.
>> The the normal Supreme Court process. In
the normal Supreme Court process, and
nobody had granted the challengers a
stay. So they were starting to comply
with the regulation. As the litigation
goes forward, the Supreme Court rules
against the EPA.
And the next day, the EPA official puts
up a blog post
and essentially says,
"Very nicely ruled against us, Supreme
Court. But in the meantime, the rule has
essentially gone into effect, and your
ruling doesn't mean very much." And that
seems to drive the Chief Justice crazy.
He concludes at the end of the memo,
"The absence of a stay in that mercury
case allowed the agency to effectively
implement an important program we held
to be contrary to law."
And you have the sense that he's peeved,
he's irked, and he's not going to let it
happen again.
>> Mhm. Roberts is telling his fellow
justices in this memo, "I don't like
what I am seeing from the Obama
administration when it comes to its
efforts to regulate climate change. I
think they're being sneaky, and the
traditional slow legal process
is letting them be kind of sneaky when
it comes to these regulations." Yes, and
the Chief Justice may be right that in
retrospect they should have paused
the mercury plan,
which was pretty fast-moving.
But when you think about the Clean Power
Plan,
it's less clear
that the court needs to act fast.
And Justice Breyer says as much
in a memo he writes responding to
Roberts that same day. Mhm. He lays out
the chronology of the Clean Power Plan,
which doesn't require industry to do
anything for 6 years,
and doesn't require total compliance
until 2030. Right. It's 2016, so that's
quite some time.
>> Right. So he's taking a completely
different attitude than Roberts. He's
thinking there's plenty of time to do
this in the usual course.
And he doesn't know why the court should
be doing what he says is quite unusual.
He says, "It's unusual for the court to
issue a stay of an agency's order
during the time that the court of
appeals is considering its lawfulness."
Right. As you mentioned earlier, the DC
court, the circuit court, is looking at
this.
Right. So he's saying, "Let it play
out." He doesn't understand what the
rush is, and he would issue an order
that basically says,
"DC Circuit, get on with your business.
Everybody else, if you run into
problems, come back to us."
What's so interesting is the Chief
Justice's reaction. He writes right back
the next day. And his tone changes a
little bit. He he seems to be getting
more irritated. He's very insistent that
the court needs to go ahead and block
this. And I want to read you one quote
of his in particular. He says, "I
recognize that the posture of this stay
request is not typical,
but review is sought of what has been
described as the most expensive
regulation ever imposed on the power
sector. So let's translate that.
>> Mhm.
He in that first phrase is just
dismissing his colleagues' procedural
concern.
Justice Breyer is saying, "Hey, this is
really unusual. Like there's something
irregular about this." And the Chief
Justice is saying essentially, "I know,
I know, I know, but it doesn't matter
because this regulation is so expensive
for states and the coal industry
that we have to do something."
So the sense of impatience that runs
through this memo
is really
animated by the fact that the Chief
Justice is ready to rule now. Mhm. He
thinks the court is going to grant
review. He thinks the court is going to
strike down this Clean Power Plan, and
he doesn't understand why you need to
let the process run out, cuz he knows
what the answer is today.
He even writes that he believes
if the court were to
ultimately at some future date hear the
case on the merits for real,
the law would be a quote "highly
unlikely to survive." Mhm. In other
words, the Chief Justice is saying,
"Without going through any of the normal
process of how the Supreme Court reviews
a case, deliberates, he's made up his
mind, and this court is going to find
against this regulation."
Yes. And what's also revealing about
this memo is that he mentions the EPA
again. This memo makes it clear that he
is truly in a power struggle with the
Obama administration. He feels this
agency has tried to sideline the court,
and he does not want it to happen again.
Yeah, and he says that in so many words.
He says, "I am of the mind
that a rule designed to transform a
substantial swath of the nation's
economy
should be tested by this court before it
is presented as a fait accompli." You
know, in public we're used to seeing the
Chief Justice strike a very even-handed,
magisterial tone. Here he's acting as a
bulldozer. He's saying to his
colleagues, "We should do something we
have never done before, and we should do
it fast." Mhm. And then
Justice Elena Kagan, also a Democratic
appointee, sounds an alarm. She files a
memo opposing the chief's stance that is
even more direct. She says, "The unique
nature of the relief sought in these
applications gives me real pause."
She uses the word unprecedented to
describe what the chief wants to do. And
she also says, "We need more time on
this case. This is complicated." She
writes, "On the merits, this is a
difficult case involving a complex
statutory and regulatory regime." So, in
other words, she's saying,
"This is weird. Are we sure we want to
do this?" The gravity of this all is,
based on these memos, starting to dawn
on everybody involved.
Right. And remember, Michael, how fast
this is moving. We're now only 3 days
into
this discussion of this hugely
consequential case.
And the next person to speak up
is Justice Samuel Alito, a Republican
appointee.
And he says
that if the court fails to act, it'll do
damage to its own legitimacy, which is,
you know, quite a
big thing to say.
He says, "A failure to stay this rule
threatens to render our ability to
provide meaningful judicial review
and, by extension, our institutional
legitimacy
a nullity."
So, not only is it dawning on them that
there's a real clash in the court, not
only is it dawning on them that they're
moving in a different direction,
they're also portraying this thing, or
at least Justice Alito is, as an almost
existential threat to the court itself.
So, you can see there that Justice Alito
is echoing
the Chief Justice's sense of insult. The
Chief Justice feels played by the Obama
administration, the EPA. And Justice
Alito is saying, "Look, the Obama
administration is trying to sideline us,
to render us irrelevant."
Adam, I'm struck by the fact that both
the Chief Justice and Justice Alito
are describing
factors that are not really about the
law, right? They're They're not about
the Constitution.
They seem to be rather focused on
their grievances with the Obama
administration, their fears about the
place of the Supreme Court,
questions of legitimacy, and those are
not factors that I think of as,
legally speaking, animating a decision.
Right. That's what's so extraordinary
about these papers. They open a window
on how the justices talk to each other,
how frank they are, really, about their
actual agendas.
And so, they're they're quite different
in kind
from their ordinary decisions,
which are a kind of mask
that portrayed the court
as confining itself
to the facts,
the relevant legal materials,
and suggesting that they produce an
inevitable legal result. Whereas,
the justices are human beings,
and they live in the world, and they
take account of a lot of stuff.
They don't say it in public, but it
turns out they say it in private. Okay.
And what happens next?
So, the whole thing, as predicted, comes
down to Justice Anthony Kennedy, the
swing vote.
And on February 9th, the fifth day of
the debate, he sends a a very short
note. It doesn't say much at all. It's
three sentences. He says he's voting
with the chief, and that's it. It's
over.
The Supreme Court rules five to four.
And within hours, the Supreme Court
issues its order.
In contrast to all this private debate
just told you about, it's just one
paragraph. It's legal boilerplate. There
is no explanation.
All the court says is that they are
blocking President Obama's signature
environmental initiative.
So, this is really a question to both of
you.
Now that you have been able to pry open
this previously locked box
of the birth of the shadow docket. Now
that you've gotten inside the first real
case of this new era,
what do you ultimately conclude from
what you've seen?
The critics of the shadow docket
have always feared
that the court
can't do
its best work
under this kind of time pressure
without good briefing and arguments and
deliberation.
And these memos vindicate that
criticism.
Uh
this This is not the court doing A+
work.
This is the court throwing ideas around,
seeming to
be motivated by,
you know, grievances against uh
a president that some of the
conservatives view as activist,
getting snippy with each other,
and just, in general,
not doing the kind of work we associate
with the nation's highest court. So,
people think the shadow docket is
problematic because the court is moving
too fast on not enough information.
And these memos support that criticism.
And to continue Adam's thought, they're
not only deciding a very important case,
what they're deciding on is a whole new
way of doing
business. They are disregarding
time-tested
procedures that have
kept courts upright for a very long
time, and they don't seem to be
considering the implications.
It's true that Justice Kagan calls what
the court is doing unprecedented, but
nobody goes further and asks the
question, "Well, if we do this, where is
it going to lead?"
And where it leads is what we've seen
over the
first year plus of the Trump
administration, where the court is
deluged
by emergency applications and is
spending, seemingly,
half its time on them.
And is, often,
in very short periods of time,
ruling
for the Trump administration
on major questions like immigration,
like agency power,
like government spending, like
transgender troops.
And in contrast to the Obama experience,
where the court shut down
a major presidential initiative,
these days on the shadow docket,
the court is mostly, and indeed
overwhelmingly,
allowing President Trump's initiatives
to go forward.
So, should we consider the shadow docket
as encouraging
the justices'
most partisan instincts?
Political scientists will tell you
that there's more partisan voting on the
shadow docket than on the merits docket.
That you're much more likely to see
Republican appointees voting in favor of
a Republican president and against a
Democratic president than on the court's
usual docket, than on its merits docket.
And one example of why this is so, and
why people, when they're acting fast,
might rely on their partisan impulses,
is in the Biden years.
The court voted against Biden on three
different emergency applications, which
then eventually returned to the court.
And the court, when it had a chance to
do the full thing,
to actually give it consideration and
deliberation, voted for Biden
in those three merits cases. So, in
short, the more time the court has to
consider cases,
the more its partisan
impulses are dampened.
Deliberation also produces trust in the
court, and that's the second part.
Public trust. Correct. The elected
branches get legitimacy because of
elections, right?
>> [music]
>> We choose our leaders, but we don't
choose our Supreme Court justices, and
they stay in power for a very long time.
>> lives. And [music] so, the act of
writing an opinion for a judge is the
act of saying, "Here's why you should
trust me. Even if you disagree with this
outcome, I'm going to show you my work.
I'm going to show you how I got to my
answer." And so, when the Supreme Court
changes [music] its way of operating and
does that so much less, there is truly a
risk to the legitimacy of the
institution.
And recall that the Supreme Court's
public approval ratings,
the public's trust in the court,
is testing all-time lows.
And its increasing reliance on the
shadow docket
to make major decisions is [snorts] only
going to make that problem [music]
worse.
Well, [music]
Adam and Jordynne,
thank you very much.
Thank you, Michael.
>> [music]
>> Thanks, Michael.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Sunday, President [music] Trump and
Iran could not even agree on whether a
new round of peace talks would occur
this week.
Trump claimed that high-level US
officials would return to Pakistan for
negotiations starting this evening. But
a few hours later, Iran [music]
said it had not agreed to those talks.
The back and forth encapsulated a
weekend of dizzying developments.
After Israel said it had reached a
ceasefire with Hezbollah,
>> [music]
>> Iran said that it would reopen the
Strait of Hormuz.
But it then tightened its grip over the
waterway, in retaliation it said, for a
week-old [music]
US naval blockade.
Meanwhile, on Sunday night, a US Navy
destroyer [music]
attacked an Iranian cargo ship that had
allegedly defied that blockade. [music]
And
This is a tragic situation, maybe the
worst tragic situation we've ever had.
[music]
A gunman in Louisiana killed eight
children in what [music] police there
are calling a case of domestic violence.
The children ranged in age from 1
[music] to 14 and were shot in multiple
locations.
The gunman was fatally shot by police
[music] during a chase.
Today's episode was produced by Rob
[music] Zipko, Mary Wilson, Asta
Chaturvedi, and Michael Simon Johnson.
>> [music]
>> It was edited by Devon Taylor,
contains music by Diane [music] Wong,
Marion Lozano, and Alicia B Vittu.
Our theme music [music] is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by [music]
Chris Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.